Now, there are two types of deterministic wallets.
The first are sequential deterministic wallets,
and these were first introduced in Electrum.
In sequential deterministic wallets,
a random number is used to generate a seed.
This seed is then put through a mathematical function,
the derives a series of private keys.
At a high level, the function takes in
the private master key that is generated from the seed.
It adds in a counter and an incrementing value.
Using those inputs, it generates a new private key.
So if you have seed,
you have all the power,
and you can use this to regenerate all the private keys.
In a deterministic wallet,
the seed is sufficient to recover all the derived keys.
Therefore, a single backup at the time of creation is sufficient.
The seed is also sufficient for a wallet export or import and
this allows for easy migration of
the user's keys between different wallet implementations.
Now the second type of deterministic wallet is a fanciest type.
It's the hierarchical deterministic wallet HD wallet.
HD wallets contain keys derived in a tree structure.
A parent key can derive a sequence of children keys and
these children keys can drive a sequence of grandchildren keys,
and this can go on into an infinite depth.
Both public and private keys can generate this parent-child hierarchy.
HD wallets came about in the Bitcoin Improvement Proposal 32 also known
as BIP32 and that's viewable online in the BIP32 GitHub repo.
As an aside, BIP stands for Bitcoin Improvement Proposal.
These proposals are used to drive improvements to the Bitcoin protocol.
Deterministic Wallets can be shared partially or entirely with different systems.
Each of these systems can function with or without the ability to spend coins.
What does this mean? With HD wallets it's possible to derive sub
public keys from public keys and sub private keys from private keys.
This creates what looks like a tree structure.
The reason we can separate the generation of sub private keys and some public keys is
because of the one-way elliptical curve
digital signature algorithm that we mentioned in the last lesson.
Remember, we can input a private key into
this one-way algorithm and get out a unique public key.
But it's near impossible to figure out the private key if given the public key.
Through this one-way algorithm,
it's possible to have
a public master key that generates a series of children public-keys.
This can happen without knowing the private key.
This flexibility provides the option to share parts of the tree structure.
This is possible by breaking off a branch and only sharing
either the public or private key and only certain levels of it.
In application, this is useful for
businesses that want to separate out different departmental spending.
Each department can break off a section of the tree and generate new keys as they need.
But, all the keys still tie back to one main key.
In another simplified scenario,
imagine a web server is doing content monetization.
Each time a user clicks on an ad on a web page, they get paid.
In this case, they need one key per page.
In other words, each page is a transaction.
A web server can share the public key,
that is the head of the public branch and derive
billions and billions of public keys just from that initial public key.
The fancy part of this is that it's possible to see
public information about these transactions if you know the public key.
But, the private key which is used to unlock
sensitive data need never be revealed or come in touch with the server.
This becomes a trustless server.
HD wallets allow for quite a bit of flexibility.
They allow sharing of only parts of a bigger tree structure.
Ensuring separation of the public or private sublevels.
However, the downside is that HD wallets require a strong backup of that master key
and this is because everything else is derived
mathematically from that master key which puts a lot of risk on it.
What's important to take away from this discussion is
the differentiating factors that make up each type of wallet and what makes you unique.
Each while it has its own use case.
Wallets continue to evolve depending on situational use cases that arise.
So it's important to know the advantages and disadvantages for each type.
No one type of wallet fits all situations.
To help you submit the characteristics of each of these three wallet types,
try your hand at the questions below.
You'll have a chance to figure out which of
these wallet types is best suited for which scenario.